Tutorial: How to set up Next.js monitoring (#6026)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring.md

---
title: How to set up Next.js monitoring
date: 2023-05-23
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/nextjs-analytics.png
tags: ['configuration', 'session replay', 'insights']
---

> Monitoring a Next.js app ensures the best possible experience for your users. It ensures the optimizations Next.js provides are working as well as possible, and minmizes errors hurting user experience.

Reviewer: Potentially stupid question: What exactly do we mean by "monitoring"? Error monitoring? Usage monitoring Something else? It's not clear to me what monitoring is

Author: A bit of both, performance monitoring (loading speeds, web vitals), usage monitoring (being used and lack of issues, errors). Rewrote.

```bash
npm i posthog-js
```

After this, create a `providers.js` file in your `app` folder. In this file, set up PostHog for the client using the `PostHogProvider` component as well as your project API key and instance address, which you can get from the getting started flow or [your project settings](https://app.posthog.com/project/settings).

```js
// app/provider.js
'use client'
import posthog from 'posthog-js'
import { PostHogProvider } from 'posthog-js/react'

if (typeof window !== 'undefined') {
  posthog.init('<ph_project_api_key>', {
    api_host: '<ph_instance_address>'
  })
}

export default function PHProvider({ children }) {
  return <PostHogProvider client={posthog}>{children}</PostHogProvider>
}
```

Once created, import and add the provider to your `layout.js` file. 

```js
// app/layout.js
import './globals.css'
import Providers from './providers'

export default function RootLayout({ children }) {
  return (
    <html lang="en">
      <Providers>
        <body>{children}</body>
      </Providers>
    </html>
  )
}
```

Once this is set up, go to your [project settings](https://app.posthog.com/project/settings), and make sure:

> - Autocapture is enabled

Reviewer: link to autocapture docs

- Under recordings, record user sessions, capture console logs, and capture network performance are all enabled.

> Enabling these provides the key monitoring tools including performance monitoring, app usage, and session replays. It also enables capturing custom events which we use for errors and more performance data next.

Reviewer: I think a screenshot of the settings here would be helpful

## Custom error capture

> Another part of monitoring is error capture. There are a couple of ways to set this up with PostHog. First, you could set up and use our [Sentry integration](/docs/libraries/sentry). Second, you could set up custom error capture, which we show here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another part of monitoring is error capturing. There are two ways to set this up with PostHog:

1. You could set up and use our [Sentry integration](/docs/libraries/sentry). 
2. Alternatively, you could set up custom error capture (shown below).
```

> To do this, we can create a React error boundary. In the `app` folder, create a file named `error.js`. In this file, set up a basic component that uses `usePostHog` to capture an `$exception` event and returns an error page. It should look like this:

Reviewer: What is a React error boundary? Perhaps worth linking to react docs somewhere? Or explain it more
```suggestion
To do this, we can create a React error boundary:

1. In the `app` folder, create a file named `error.js`. 
2. In this file, set up a basic component that uses `usePostHog` to capture an `$exception` event and returns an error page. 

It should look like this:
```

```js
'use client'
import { usePostHog } from 'posthog-js/react'

export default function Error({ error }) {
  const posthog = usePostHog()
  posthog?.capture('$exception', {
    message: error.message,
  })
  
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>There was an error</h1>
    </div>
  )
}
```

> Now, in your `app` folder, create a new folder named `about` and add a file named `page.js`. In this file, set up a component that errors like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, in your `app` folder, create a new folder named `about` and add a file named `page.js`. In this file, set up a component that throws an error:
```

```js
// app/about/page.js
const session = null

export default function About() {

  if (!session) {
    throw new Error('No session')
  }

  return (
    <h1>Home</h1>
  )
}
```

> When you go to `[http://localhost:3000/about](http://localhost:3000/about)`, you get the error page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you go to `[http://localhost:3000/about](http://localhost:3000/about)`, you'll see the error page.
```

![Error](../images/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring/app-error.png)

This also captures an `exception` event in PostHog with details like the current URL, OS, browser, time, and more.

![Exception](../images/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring/exception.png)

> This captures errors thrown from your app in PostHog, wherever they happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will capture errors thrown in your app (wherever they happen) into PostHog.
```

> ## Custom performance capture

Reviewer: Overall I enjoyed this section! Didn't know we could do this

<a href="https://gitme.me/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia4.giphy.com%2Fmedia%2FQEYYlJqOaEhXrjTrOH%2Fgiphy.gif&token=nice" data-gitmeme-token="nice"><img src="https://media4.giphy.com/media/QEYYlJqOaEhXrjTrOH/giphy.gif" title="Created by gitme.me with /nice"/></a>

> Another key part of monitoring your Next.js application is performance monitoring. Session replays track performance metrics like first contentful paint, DOM interactive, and page loaded times at a session level. If you want these values in the aggregate, we can capture them using `useReportWebVitals`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another key part of monitoring your Next.js app is performance monitoring. Session replays track performance metrics like First Contentful Paint, DOM interactive, and page loaded times at a session level. If you want these values in the aggregate, we can capture them using `useReportWebVitals`.
```

To set this up, create a new file in your `app` folder named `web-vitals.js`. In this file, import `useReportWebVitals` and `usePostHog`, then export a function that captures an event with the same name as the metric with all the metric details as properties.

```js
// app/web-vitals.js
'use client'
import { useReportWebVitals } from 'next/web-vitals';
import { usePostHog } from 'posthog-js/react' 
 
export function WebVitals() {
  const posthog = usePostHog()

  useReportWebVitals((metric) => {
    posthog.capture(metric.name, metric)
  });
}
```

Once created, add your `WebVitals` component to your `layout.js` file.

```js
// app/layout.js
import Providers from './providers'
import { WebVitals } from './web-vitals'

export default function RootLayout({ children }) {
  return (
    <html lang="en">
      <Providers>
        <body>
          <WebVitals />
          {children}
        </body>
      </Providers>
    </html>
  )
}
```

> Once done, you start to see metrics in your PostHog instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once done, you'll start to see performance metrics in your PostHog instance.
```

![Performance metrics](../images/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring/monitoring-metrics.png)

> **Note:** you might want to filter for specific web vital events by checking their name or sample using specific criteria as this method generates **a lot of events** for each pageview.

## Creating a monitoring dashboard

With everything set up for monitoring our Next.js app, we can create a dashboard that gives us a complete overview. On this dashboard, we will create insights for page load, time to first byte, first contentful paint, cumulative layout shift, and errors.

> To start go to the [dashboards tab](https://app.posthog.com/dashboard), click new dashboard, choose blank dashboard, then add an insight. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start, go to the [dashboards tab](https://app.posthog.com/dashboard), click new dashboard, choose blank dashboard, and then add an insight. 
```

We start with averages for our page load metrics. Select `LCP` as your series, then aggregate by average property value, select value as your property, enable formula mode, and divide `A` by 1000 to get seconds. Both the trend and number chart type work well for this. Once done, click "Save & add to dashboard." 

![LCP insight](../images/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring//lcp-insight.mp4)

Afterward, you can create similar insights the other performance metrics like TTFB, FCP, and CLS. Your dashboard will look like this:

![Dashboard](../images/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring/dashboard.png)

> Next, we can do some analysis of our errors. We can create insights for errors broken down by current URL and message. Use the `Exception` event as the series, aggregate by total count, break down by current URL, and choose the total value bar chart. You can duplicate the insight, change the breakdown to `message`, and add both to your dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we can analyze our errors. We can create insights for errors broken down by current URL and message. Use the `Exception` event as the series, aggregate by total count, break down by current URL, and choose the total value bar chart. You can duplicate the insight, change the breakdown to `message`, and add both to your dashboard.
```

---
title: How to set up Next.js monitoring
date: 2023-05-24
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/nextjs-analytics.png
tags: ['configuration', 'session replay', 'insights']
---

Monitoring a Next.js app creates the best possible experience for your users. It ensures your Next.js app is performing well, loading fast, and doesn't have significant errors hurting user experience.

> Already have a Next.js app? [Click here to skip to the PostHog installation](#set-up-posthog).

## Create a Next.js app

> You need to create a Next.js app if you are going to monitor it. To create one, run the following command, choose **not** to use TypeScript, and the defaults for all the other options (including using the app router).

Reviewer: nit: dont think the opening sentence is needed
```suggestion
To create a Next.js app, run the following command, choose **not** to use TypeScript, and the defaults for all the other options (including using the app router).
```

```

After this, create a `providers.js` file in your `app` folder. In this file, set up PostHog for the client using the `PostHogProvider` component as well as your project API key and instance address, which you can get from the getting started flow or [your project settings](https://app.posthog.com/project/settings).

```js
// app/provider.js
'use client'
import posthog from 'posthog-js'
import { PostHogProvider } from 'posthog-js/react'

if (typeof window !== 'undefined') {
  posthog.init('<ph_project_api_key>', {
    api_host: '<ph_instance_address>'
  })
}

export default function PHProvider({ children }) {
  return <PostHogProvider client={posthog}>{children}</PostHogProvider>
}
```

Once created, import and add the provider to your `layout.js` file. 

```js
// app/layout.js
import './globals.css'
import Providers from './providers'

export default function RootLayout({ children }) {
  return (
    <html lang="en">
      <Providers>
        <body>{children}</body>
      </Providers>
    </html>
  )
}
```

Once this is set up, go to your [project settings](https://app.posthog.com/project/settings), and make sure:

- [Autocapture](/docs/data/autocapture) is enabled

> - Under recordings, record user sessions, capture console logs, and capture network performance are all enabled.

Reviewer: nit: maybe hyperlink to the app here

Author: Got it

![Settings](../images/tutorials/nextjs-monitoring/settings.png)

Enabling these provides the key monitoring tools including performance monitoring, app usage, and session replays. It also enables capturing custom events which we use for errors and more performance data next.

## Custom error capture

> Another part of monitoring is error capturing. There are two ways to set this up with PostHog:

Reviewer: nit: feels strange to say "another" when this is the first one.

```suggestion
Error capturing gives you insights into what errors your users are experiencing. There are two ways to set this up with PostHog:
```
